University of  Waterloo 
ENGL 192: Communication in the Engineering Profession 
Fall 2026 | Section 008 | Room: DWE 1515 
Contact Information 
Instructor: 	 Instructor
Ofﬁce: 	 	 PAS 2224  
Class Hours: 	 T/Th, 1:00pm-2:20pm 
Ofﬁce Hours:	Tuesdays & Thursdays, 10:00am to 11:00am, by appointment only . 
e-mail: 		 {email} 
Course Description 
This course will teach written and oral communication in electrical and computer engineering. 
Students will practice the major genres of  communication relevant to internal and external 
groups that might include clients, peers, technical staff, public audiences, and policy-focused 
stakeholders. Students will enhance their critical thinking skills and creative competencies to 
better understand the complex systems-level structures of  communication from project ideation, 
workﬂows, and document design to audience reception, presentation, and reﬂection. Through 
iterative communication design processes that emphasize student agency and con ﬁdence, 
students will craft audience-speciﬁc messages through research, writing, & presenting. 
Learning Outcomes 
By the end of  this course, students should be able to do the following: 
1.     Explain the role of  reports, the press, advertising, video and other communications media in 
engineering [Comm] 
2.     Demonstrate command of  appropriate writing skills and style [Comm] 
3.     Demonstrate good literature research skills (gathering data or relevant information, 
analyzing the results of  research efforts in terms of  data and argument, and assessing the 
credibility and applicability of  information) [Comm] 
4.     Construct a persuasive technical argument [Comm] 
5.     Write an effective engineering report by attending to context, audience, and genre [Comm] 
6.     Organize and deliver a persuasive oral presentation [Comm] 
Textbook and Reading 
Although a textbook is not strictly required for this course, a small selection  
of  readings and reference materials will be provided from Graves and Graves’s 
/A Strategic Guide to Technical Communication/. If  you wish to have a 
physical edition, order directly from Broadview press or via 3rd party . 
 
Graves, Heather and Roger Graves. A Strategic Guide to T echnical  
Communication. 2nd Edition. 

ENGL 191 Syllabus—Fall 2026 2
Course Delivery 
This course will be delivered in-person. Y ou will access and complete key components of  the 
course on a week-to-week basis. Course materials will be made available via LEARN. Content 
will be delivered in the form of  modules. Classes will begin with a presentation to introduce main 
topics; exercises related to topics will follow . Readings will be assigned either ad hoc or from 
textbook selections. Plan to do 2-3 hours of  work for each hour of  in-class time we have. In 
addition to lectures, readings, and mini-assignments, you will complete three main assignments 
which function as parts of  a whole: the pitch email, the technical report, and the presentation 
form a course-long project whose theme and structure you will consider from the start.  
Communication with your Instructor 
This course is designed to develop your proﬁciency in the major communicative genres used in 
the engineering profession. Ofﬁce hours are Tuesdays & Thursdays, by appointment, from 
10:00am to 11:00am. I am always available via email ({email}) to answer any 
questions or to clarify concepts. I will communicate with you regularly via LEARN and/or email 
to help keep you focussed each week. Please do not hesitate to contact me at any time. I am 
happy to hear from you and will try to respond as promptly and fully as possible. If  you have a 
question about your assignments, it is best to ask about it right away . As in the workplace, so too 
in this class: last-minute inquiries are unlikely to yield promising results. Stay organized.  
Progression of  Assignments 
Although the Technical Report is not worked on in earnest until after midterms, it represents the 
summative assessment for this course. The report—in addition to being a well-conceived, clearly 
structured, and persuasive document—is intended to solve an engineering problem you wish to 
explore, an idea you will ﬁrst present in your pitch email. Y our idea should respond to an existing 
problem in a speciﬁc area/discipline of  engineering focus. 
Our relationship in this course is both academic and professional. Y ou are junior engineers. I am 
your professor, supervisor, ﬁnancier, advisor, and technical expert. In the Pitch, you will propose 
an engineering idea you’re interested in applying. Y our Technical Report will showcase how your 
project works and why your project is important and deserving of  funds/resources. Y our 
presentations—both the in-class and the Engineering Winter Showcase—are an opportunity to 
show your unique work to technical and non-technical publics/persons of  interest. Mini-
assignments are designed to develop your proﬁciency as a professional communicator. 
Each project in this course is connected to the others. This is meant to represent the iterative 
function of  writing, idea production, research, and the professional cycle of  communication. It is 
highly advisable that you begin thinking about your Technical Report right from the 
start of the course. Each assignment builds towards the achievement of  this major goal.  
Course Assignments Grade Breakdown 
1.Assignment 1: Project Pitch & Presentation (15%) 
2.Assignment 2: Technical Report (35%) 
3.Assignment 3: Engineering Presentation (10%)                 
4.Contributions: Mini-Assignments, Participation, Attendance, Showcase (40%) 
ENGL 191 Syllabus—Fall 2026 3
How and Where to Submit Assignments 
Electronic format: PDF , online via LEARN dropbox. Emailed assignments will not be graded.  
Assignment Project Phases 
Assignments in this course build on your project idea from your pitch and form the major stages 
of  how one would undertake the proposal of  a project as a professional engineer. I will provide 
you with detailed project sheets for each of  your assignments, all of  which are designed to guide 
you through this process with as much ease and clarity as possible. From time to time, we will 
complete project analyses, which will help you contextualize how to produce these deliverables. 
The pitch assignment requires that you pitch a project idea to me. This assignment will test 
your knowledge of  the conventions of  email communication as well as your ability to present 
idea(s) persuasively in front of  an audience of  peers. 
The technical report functions as the centrepiece of  the course and develops in stages. Y ou 
will begin individually in Part I with a technical report rationale, setting out your objectives, 
milestones, and work plan for the project. Y ou will then be placed in a group of  two or three, 
where you will select one of  your projects to carry forward. This is where you will write Part II of  
the rationale, accounting for the work completed, work remaining, and current status of  the 
project. Y our group then continues its research and drafts the full technical report, which you will 
circulate for peer review before submitting the ﬁnal version and presenting. The report explains 
what is known about a problem, supports that account with credible research, establishes why the 
problem matters, and proposes a credible solution grounded in existing engineering knowledge. 
The presentations translate your written technical report into spoken and visual forms. Y ou 
will present your technical report to the class as a slideshow and you will design a research-style 
poster to display at the Engineering Showcase. The technical report, presentation, and poster 
form a persuasive set; your audience is composed of  potential investors, shareholders, and other 
professional non-engineers—the language of  your written, oral, visual work should reﬂect that. 
These assignments are structured to simulate the professional work ﬂow of  proposing 
engineering projects—pitching, reporting, presenting—to engineering supervisors, investors, 
shareholders, and other business-oriented individuals, all of  whom comprise the key decision-
makers about whether or not projects become approved in professional settings. This course is 
designed to teach you the communicative and persuasive strategies that will help you in your 
careers as junior engineers in training in alignment with Canadian Engineering Accreditation 
Board (CEAB) outcomes and expectations. 
Assessments & Accommodations 
Although you will have until the very last minute of  assignment deadlines to submit your work, you 
are encouraged to finish assignment in advance of  due dates to mitigate unexpected interruptions. 
If  you require accommodation, please let me know ahead of  time. Late assignments will be 
penalized 5% per day with no exceptions unless appropriate documentation is submitted. 
ENGL 191 Syllabus—Fall 2026 4
Outline of Assignments 
Assignment 1: Project Pitch & Presentation—15% (Individual) | Due: Oct. 5-8 
Y ou will write an e-mail message in the form of  a pitch addressed to me, your supervisor, that 
demonstrates your knowledge of  email authoring as well as project presentation. Y our objective is 
to communicate a tentative idea for an engineering project. Y our job is to convince your 
audience, in writing and orally , that your project is worth the investment of  company resources. 
Assignment 2: Technical Report—35% (Individual & Group) | Due: Nov. 29 
Y ou will draft a technical report for an engineering project of  your own design. Y our report will 
1) explain known information about a problem, 2) support this description with research from 
credible sources, and 3) articulate why the problem is important and how you intend to solve it. 
Y ou will demonstrate your awareness of  existing engineering know-how about the issue and you 
will propose a credible solution. Y our concepts and report must show speci ﬁc research and 
original work. Y our idea can evolve over time, but your objective is to meet the emerging needs 
of  your ﬁeld of  engineering. 
Assignment 3: Engineering Presentation—10% (Group, in class) | Due: Nov. 30-Dec. 6 
Once you have submitted your Technical Report in written form, you will present the contents of  
your technical report in class in front of  your peers through a presentation. To do this, you will 
translate the main aspects of  your report in a powerpoint; in parallel, you will create a poster—
separate from the in-class presentation—for public display during our Engineering Showcase.  
Contributions—40% (ongoing) 
Engineers work in teams to review each other’s work and suggest improvements to one another. 
In this course you will be expected to do the same. Each week you will contribute to lessons and 
participate in course-related activities. Y ou will complete mini-assignments, modules, grading 
alignments, and work/peer-review periods throughout the course, all of  which are designed to 
help you learn skills and strategies applicable to the completion of  your major course 
assignments. Participating in discussion, showing courtesy to colleagues, reviewing others’ work, 
and helping others succeed are the expected qualities of  engineering professionals; we will strive 
to emulate these ideals as much as possible. Grading for contributions proceeds as follows: 
Attendance (10%): in-class, on-time, ready to learn; 0.5% each, for 17 sessions; perfect = full 10% 
Worksheets (~15%): mini-assignments graded for quality (1=minimal; 2=sufﬁcient; 3=excellent) 
Modules & Quizzes (~5%): either complete or incomplete; each item worth 1-2% 
Poster Design & Showcase (10%): poster design (5%) + (5%) for winter showcase (Dec 7/8). 
**Note: Y our instructor may (or may not) make grading adjustments (rounding up or down) at the 
end of  the course. The instructor reserves the right to round student grades based on the 
student’s quality of  engagement, attitude, and willingness to learn as expressed during the term.  
*Last chance to submit outstanding assignments: December 9, 2026 (before 11:59pm) 
Any work submitted after this time will be automatically graded as incomplete unless 1) an 
extension has been granted, 2) formal arrangements have been made with the instructor ahead 
of  time, or, 3) a valid university-standard accommodation is in place. 
ENGL 191 Syllabus—Fall 2026 5
Course Schedule 
WEEK 1: INTRODUCTIONS 
For September 9 through September 13, complete the following tasks: 
	 Attend Lecture(s): “Communication in the Engineering Profession” 
	 Read “ Assignment Outline” 
	 Read Graves & Graves Ch. 7: “Writing Email and Letters for the Workplace” (LEARN) 
	 Read “Loss Control Bulletin” & “Savings E-mails” (LEARN)	      	       
	 Complete Quiz: “Syllabus & Assignment Outline Quiz” (Sept. 13 (1%)) 
WEEK 2: COMMUNICATING PROBLEMS & INFO-SEEKING IN ENGINEERING 
For September 14 through September 20, complete the following tasks: 
	 Attend Lecture(s): “The Swales CARS Model of  Engineering Articles” & “Info-Seeking” 
	 Read 2 Engineering Articles of  your choice (LEARN)	 	 	      
	 Complete Module: “Information Sourcing/Seeking” (Sept. 20 (1%)) 
	 Complete Worksheet: “Deﬁning an Engineering Problem” (Sept. 20 (3%)) 
WEEK 3: ENGINEERING DOCUMENTS: WRITING REQUESTS, REPORTS, PROPOSALS	  
For September 21 through September 27, complete the following tasks: 
	 Attend Lecture(s): “Technical Reports & Proposal Elements” & “ Assignments I, II, & III” 
WEEK 4: PITCHING IDEAS WITH PROCEDURE 
For September 28 through October 4, complete the following tasks: 
	 Attend Lecture(s): “The Art of  the Pitch” & “Pitch Practice (Makes Pitch Perfect)” 
	 Complete: Pitch & Procedure: “The Swales x Shark-Tank Analysis” (Oct. 4 (3%)) 
WEEK 5: PITCH PRESENTATIONS 
For October 5 through October 11, complete the following tasks: 
	 Attend Lecture: “Pitch Presentations” 
	 Complete: Pitch Presentations | In class (Oct. 5-8 (15%—10% written, 5% oral)) 
WEEK 6: READING WEEK 
October 12 through October 18: Reading Week (no class) 
WEEK 7 (PART 1): TECHNICAL MANUALS 
For October 19 & 20, complete the following tasks: 
	 Attend Lecture(s): “Technical/Instructional Manuals” & “How To ‘How To’” 
	 Read: Ch. 10 “Writing how-to Documents” (p. 233-255, LEARN). 
	 Complete: Technical Manual Analysis (Assigned Oct. 19, Due Oct. 31 (3%)) 
WEEK 7 (INTERIM) 
For October 21 through 27: Midterms—No classes 
ENGL 191 Syllabus—Fall 2026 6
WEEK 7 (PART 2): WHITE PAPERS 
For October 28 through 31, complete the following tasks: 
	 Attend Lecture(s): “White Papers” & “Rationale I” 
	 Read: Chapter 9, p. 193-198; 200-207 (LEARN) 
	 Complete: Report Rationale, Part I: Objectives, Milestones, Work Plan (Oct. 31 (3%)) 
WEEK 8: REQUESTS FOR PROPOSALS 
For November 1 through November 8, complete the following tasks:	  
	 Attend Lecture(s): “Engineering Proposals” & “Rationale II” 
	 Read: Ch. 8 “Writing Winning Proposals” p. 165-192 (LEARN) 
	 Complete: Rationale, Part II: Work Completed, Work Remaining, & Status (Nov. 8 (3%)) 
WEEK 9: ENGINEERING PERSUASIVE REPORTS 
For November 9 through November 15, complete the following tasks: 
	 Attend Lecture(s): “What Makes Technical Reports Persuasive?” 
	 *no deliverable this week | time to work on technical reports 
	  
WEEK 10: DESIGNING DOCUMENTS & LAYOUTS 
For November 16 through November 22, complete the following tasks: 
	 Attend Lecture(s): “Writing Winning Proposals” & “Reports” 
	 Read: “Designing Documents and Page Layout” 
	 Complete: Technical Report Draft (for Peer Review | Nov. 22 - LEARN) 
WEEK 11: PEER REVIEW 
For November 23 through November 29, complete the following tasks: 
	 Attend Lecture(s): “Peer Review: Tips and Techniques” & “Peer Review” 
	 Read: Peer Review: Best Practices (LEARN) 
	 Complete: Peer Reviews (Nov. 26 (2%)) 
	 Complete: Technical Report (Nov. 29 (35%))  
	  
WEEK 12: PRESENTATIONS 
For November 30 through December 6, complete the following tasks: 
	 Attend Lecture(s): “Presentations” 
	 Complete: Technical Report Presentations (in class (10%))	  
	 Complete: Posters (Submit electronically & print by/before Dec. 6th (5%)) 
WEEK 13: SHOWCASE (FINAL CLASS) 
For December 7/8, complete the following tasks: 
	 Attend: Engineering Winter Showcase Poster Presentation (5%, contributions) 
	 Complete: End of course quiz (Due Dec. 8 (1%)) 
*Our course calendar is subject to occasional changes. Although there is no intention to deviate 
from the above schedule of  topics, adjustments will be made to the course as necessary to 
accommodate unforeseeable interruptions or to address instructional necessities. If  and when 
changes are required, you will be notiﬁed via email or LEARN or both. 
ENGL 191 Syllabus—Fall 2026 7
Course Policies 
Equipment you need: 
Pen/Pad/Paper, laptop with internet access; access to LEARN 
Professional Behaviour 
1.Participation: Every lesson, task, and assessment speciﬁcally supports your program and 
career; participation in each aspect of  the course is like participation in tasks at a job.  
2.Emergencies & Expected Disruptions: Please communicate with me as soon as possible. 
3.E-mail: all email must come from your @uwaterloo.ca address. Please do not solicit email 
from other addresses. Y our subject line must begin with “ENGL 191”. Be sure to use a 
professional salutation, write a speciﬁc message, and sign your name as you would a letter. 
Expect a formal reply to your queries within twenty-four hours between Monday and Friday . 
Last-minute questions are unlikely to produce timely responses.  
Course Policy on Late Assignments and Rewrites 
  
Assignments submitted anytime after syllabus-prescribed times will be penalized 5% per day , 
including weekend days, unless students either arrange a valid extension or possess a valid 
exemption. Extensions on assignments will not be granted unless arranged at least 72 hours in 
advance of  due date, notwithstanding those reasons outlined in the UW Policy Regarding Illness 
and Missed Tests. Outside of  cases of  academic misconduct, a failing assignment may be 
reattempted once—after consultation with me—to raise the mark to a pass if  achieved. 
Otherwise, rewrites or resubmissions of  graded work will not be permitted.    
UW Policy Regarding Illness and Missed Tests 
The University of  Waterloo Examination Regulations state that:  
- A medical certiﬁcate presented in support of  an of ﬁcial petition for relief  from normal 
academic requirements must provide all of  the information requested on the “University of  
Waterloo V eriﬁcation of  Illness” form or it will not be accepted. This form can be obtained from 
Health Services or at VIF.  
- If  a student has a test/examination deferred due to acceptable medical evidence, he/she 
normally will write the test/examination at a mutually convenient time, to be determined by the 
course instructor.  
- The University acknowledges that, due to the pluralistic nature of  the University community , 
some students may on religious grounds require alternative times to write tests and examinations.  
-Elective arrangements (such as travel plans) are not considered acceptable grounds for granting 
an alternative examination time. 
ENGL 191 Syllabus—Fall 2026 8
USE OF GENERATIVE ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
This is no more of  a surprise to me than it will be to you: generative AI is here to stay .  
Generative artiﬁcial intelligence trained using large language models (LLMs) or other methods to 
produce text, images, music, code, etc.—especially GPT , DALL-E, Co-Pilot, Gemini, etc.—may 
not be used during class unless explicitly permitted by your instructor. The use of  AI tools to 
complete assignments—if  permitted—must be done in accordance with Policy 71. If  you decide 
to use AI tools, please keep the following in mind: 
1)AI tools must not be used to plagiarize: Using AI to generate text (whole or modiﬁed) 
that is presented as your own represents a Policy 71 violation. If  you don’t know that 
something you’re doing is considered plagiarism, ask your instructor or librarian. Excuses 
like: “I didn’t know I was plagiarizing” are not considered a defence. When in doubt, cite. 
Always remember: a case of  academic misconduct can get you removed from your program.  
2)If using AI generated text, remember to cite: this is consistent with any other academic 
practice. Although attribution rules continue to evolve, you should use APA guidelines to 
correctly format your work in this course.  
3)Be prepared to show your work: If  the use of  GenAI is suspected where not permitted, 
you may be asked to meet with your instructor to provide evidence that your work is indeed 
yours. When working on assignments, document your process and make notes as you go. If  
there remain questions about whether or not you’ve submitted original work, academic 
misconduct allegations may be brought to the Associate Dean. 
4)Be aware that generative AI is not always “right”: keep in mind that GenAI is liable 
(and likely) to make slight or egregious errors (or anything in between). It also generalizes 
important particulars, which skews the information it produces. GenAI is known to falsify 
references to other work and inaccurately express ideas. Y ou are accountable for the content 
and accuracy of  the work you produce in this course, including any supported by GenAI. Be 
aware that the legal/copyright status of  GenAI inputs and outputs is unclear. For more 
information, see the following: “Copyright Advisory Committee”. 
Notes on Short-T erm Absences  
Students may be required to complete the following academic obligations during a short-term 
absence: 
• Attend scheduled course meet times that are listed in their class schedule with one of  the 
following component types: Clinic (CLN), Field Studies (FLD), Laboratory (LAB), or 
Studio (STU) 
• Complete other requirements, as speciﬁed in the course outline, for classes including meet 
times with a component type of  Clinic (CLN) 
• Attend deferred, rescheduled, or supplemental ﬁnal examinations 
• Write a summative test, equivalent in scope and format to a ﬁnal examination, for a 
course scheduled for less than the full Formal Lecture Period (e.g., a block course offered 
over six weeks), as speciﬁed in the course outline 
ENGL 191 Syllabus—Fall 2026 9
• Participate in scheduled presentations and symposia, as speciﬁed in the course outline 
• Submit deliverables related to group projects or involving peer review , as speciﬁed in the 
course outline 
• Short-term absences cannot be used for graded course components that involve a formally 
scheduled presentation or are part of  a symposium, colloquium, or showcase. They also 
cannot be used for graded components requiring live, in-person group work, such as peer 
review workshops. These assignments involve singular events that cannot be rescheduled 
and may depend on the participation of  classmates during class time. It is the student’s 
responsibility to review the deadlines for these in-person assessments at the start of  the 
term and to contact the instructor within the ﬁrst two weeks of  class if  they anticipate a 
conﬂict with a scheduled event. This policy does not override university-wide policies (e.g., 
National Day for Truth and Reconciliation), absences due to religious observance, 
documented extenuating circumstances, accommodations through AccessAbility Services, 
or VOC requirements. 
Additional Course & Course Support Information 
Academic Integrity  
In order to maintain a culture of  academic integrity , members of  the University of  Waterloo and 
its Federated University and Afﬁliated Colleges are expected to promote honesty , trust, fairness, 
respect and responsibility .  
All students registered in courses at UW are expected to know what constitutes academic 
integrity , to avoid committing academic offences, and to take responsibility for their actions. A 
student who is unsure whether an action constitutes an offence, or who needs help in learning 
how to avoid offences (e.g., plagiarism, cheating) or about “rules” for group work/collaboration 
should seek guidance from the course professor, academic advisor, or the Associate Dean. When 
misconduct has been found to have occurred, disciplinary penalties will be imposed under 
University Academic Discipline Policy and UW Policy 71 – Student Discipline. 
Academic Integrity website (Arts) 
http://arts.uwaterloo.ca/arts/ugrad/academic_responsibility .html 
Academic Integrity Ofﬁce (UW) 
http://uwaterloo.ca/academicintegrity/ 
Counselling Services  
Counselling Services provides support free of  charge and protects your privacy . Find them at 
https://uwaterloo.ca/counselling-services/. 
Student Success Ofﬁce 
The Student Success Ofﬁce also provides support free-of-charge and protects your privacy . This 
ofﬁce provides academic and personal development services, resources for international students, 
as well as study abroad and exchange support. They are located at South Campus Hall, second 
ﬂoor. Ofﬁce hours: Monday , Wednesday , Friday , 8:30am-4:30pm; Tues/Thurs, 8:30am-6pm.  
ENGL 191 Syllabus—Fall 2026 10
The Writing and Communications Centre 
The Writing and Communications Centre works with students as they develop their ideas, draft, 
and revise. Writing and Communications specialists offer one-on-one support in planning 
assignments, synthesizing and citing research, organizing papers and reports, designing 
presentations and e-portfolios, and revising for clarity and coherence. Y ou can make multiple 
appointments throughout the term or drop in at the library for quick questions or feedback.   
Accommodations for students with learning challenges  
The AccessAbility Services (AS) Ofﬁce, located in Needles Hall, Room 1132, collaborates with all 
academic departments to arrange appropriate accommodations for students with learning 
challenges without compromising the academic integrity of  the curriculum. If  you require 
academic accommodations to lessen the impact of  your learning challenge, please register with 
the AS Ofﬁce at the beginning of  each academic term.